I. Introduction: What the Paintings of Yun Hyong-keun Are Not
The recently renewed fascination of the Korean art world with the Korean Dansaekhwa2 has not provided a truthful illumination of Yun Hyong-keun’s art. He explained to Korean and foreign art critics who had written about his works, that he found his own spiritual resources and creative inspiration in Kim Jeong-hui [pen name: Chusa]’s writing. No one paid any attention to his statement and went on to characterize his art as abstract monochrome painting or Minimal art, pointing out superficial or imagined similarities between him and Western artists of Minimalism or Abstract Expressionism. Yun was implying that he strove to achieve something quite different from what his contemporaries—whether in Korea or in the West—were doing in the name of art, be that avant-garde, modern, or postmodern.

Without understanding the authentic distinction of Yun’s art within the Korean Dansaekhwa, it will not be possible to appreciate properly his artistic achievements. Dansaekhwa is a Korean noun phrase with the meaning “single-color” painting. In other words, it is another name for the “monochrome painting” of the Western art world as it has evolved in many different variants, from late Abstract-Expressionist versions to its Color-Field, Minimalist, and European varieties. There always was a common thread in their aesthetic commitments at each stage of the aforementioned art-historical evolution of Western modernist easel painting. For what kind of aesthetic, art-philosophical, or even socio-
political commitments did Koreans decide to paint monochrome paintings? What is the common thread in all those seemingly Western-influenced, flat, abstract paintings brought together at the National Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art, Seoul, in 2012? The answer offered is that Koreans have a propensity for monochrome colors.
Yun objected to such categorizing based upon unfounded nationalistic sentiment. For him, it seemed clear that Korean monochromists had better make up their minds whether their work belongs somewhere on the evolutionary line of the Western modernist monochrome painting. That is why he broke with his contemporaries whose abstract paintings were either geometric or gestural, the former featuring extremely matte, highly saturated colors, the latter typified by heavy impasto with an appearance of forced haphazardness. By his deliberate choice to use “heavily diluted paint” to stain the canvas, Yun was declaring that he was no longer “Arting” in the context of the global modernist aesthetic commitments of the West. Diluted oil would have the fluidity of the traditional stone-ground ink, and now he could wield brushes the way traditional Korean and other East Asian ink brush writers and painters have done. Traditional East Asian ink always had the tendency to stain the paper, unlike Western oils, which can be piled on top of one another. From then on, it was the ink brush writing master Kim in whom he found his artistic inspiration.
He pursued to paint on canvas with diluted oil paint, the degree of dilution varying to suit the circumstances of his specific artistic requirement for each new work. However, he looked for a way to continue what Kim achieved into a new evolutionary phase of the second half of the twentieth century. It would take no time for Yun to discover that Kim was actually making abstract paintings even as he was writing Chinese characters with an ink brush; he wanted to continue the core ethos and philosophy of Kim’s abstract art in which visible things serve merely as indices of what remains invisible. After this breaking away from his contemporaries roughly in the middle of 1975, all of Yun’s paintings strove to create a palpable, immanent-while-invisible presence on canvas. His works are antidotes to the Western avant-garde art world in which “dematerialization” was the reigning direction; instead, he created literal objects with powerful presence and ontological status.
Yun had distinctive artistic goals derived from profound philosophical musings on the act of creating. The philosophy of his art is based on the spirit of daam (淡) which characterizes Kim’s late works and is also embodied in Yun’s. According to François Jullien, it is this very spirit which the ancient traditional East Asian artists pursued rather than aesthetics as was the case in Western art. They valued something entirely different.3 It is the spirit of daam that Yun learned from Kim’s writings and to which he was able to give “modernist” painterly articulations, relocating that ancient ideal of art into the artistic-cultural contexts of the globalized post-modern world. However, the spirit of daam in Kim and Yun cannot be wholly captured by Jullien’s concept of fadeur, meaning “blandness” in English. 

II. On the Spirit of Daam (淡)
A Korean might say, when asked how one feels about facing a stressful situation, “淡淡하다 (‘daam-daam’ hada).” In English translation, this could have a range of meanings: “I’m okay,” “I can handle it, or “I have let go of everything.” However, in English, this person might feel furious about the situation while having no problem handling it in his own way, whereas the Korean is saying that he has no feelings in any way, almost as indifferent as if he were merely an observing bystander rather than a participating agent. “ ‘淡淡’하다 (‘daam-daam’ hada)” therefore means being impervious or imperturbable.
A Korean is also apt to say of a dish: “ ‘淡白’하다 (‘daam-baeck’ hada).” This person is saying, “it has natural tastes,” meaning that it has only the inherent flavors of the natural ingredients used in the concoction of the dish, with nothing artificial added, neither chemicals nor extra spices. Having a natural taste is not necessarily the same as being “bland.” Ancient East Asians drank tea for its daam taste, so much so that Lin Yutang4 said about enjoying Chinese tea that the flavor of the tea is so subtle that it is not for a busy person; one has to be able to appreciate what lingers in the mouth after a sip as the faint natural flavor and taste of the ingredients are released. The same might be said of other foods: such is daam taste that emerges spontaneously from what is natural or found in nature. 
The character 淡 (daam) that occurs in 淡淡 (daam-daam) and 淡白 (daam-baek) refers to something that shows only what is essential and skeletal about itself, shedding everything that is unessential and thus manifesting its nature. As a Chinese character, 淡 (daam) is further composed of three components: a character standing for water and two standing for fire on top of one another on the right side of the daam character. As an image, it is said to represent water being distilled on two strong fires, thereby purifying the liquid. Through purification, only the most essential elements and qualities remain.
Insofar as daam stands for purification, it can be compared to another Chinese character 瀞 (jeong) = 淨 (jeong) + 靜 (jeong). 淨 (jeong) means clean or purify, whereas 靜 (jeong) means quietude or peace. Therefore, as a result of being stilled in inactivity, things become settled and quietude prevails in 靜 (jeong). Imagine a turbulent body of water left to sit still; In good time, the body of water is calmed with all kinds of impure elements settling down to the bottom. Now the body of water is not only still; it is also completely purified and clear that one can look down through the depth to the sediment at the very bottom. Arriving at this state of mind is exactly what all the ancient East Asian traditions of spiritual training in Taoist practices, or somewhat similarly in the 禪 (seon) meditation, aspired to achieve.5 One could reformulate the ultimate goal of spiritual practices, whether Zen, Taoist, or Yogic, as the achievement of daam. One strives, through breathing exercises to achieve the calmed state of mind, body and emotion; then and only then, would one be able to see one’s very own self as well as things and phenomena of the world objectively and with clarity, freed from any theories, prejudices, and habitual ways of perception.
The key to understanding 禪 (seon) experience is 淡 (daam) and 瀞 (jeong). Daam refers to the state of mind in which all the complex calculus of private, personal interests has been let go and suspended for a while to allow one to encounter things (beings) for what they are in their own “thingness.” This “encounter” enables one to open up and unconsciously and naturally respond to and interact with any thing in nature or in the world. This sort of encounter is something that occurs spontaneously and unexpectedly between any things, with neither side as subject or object. 

III. Ontological Mood of Daam in the Works of Kim Jeong-hui and Yun Hyong-keun
Coming upon any of Yun’s works, one experiences the sense of encounter with a kind of presence, albeit a vague and even mysterious one. Yet, this presence is not some illusion, but a seemingly real encounter. It is often said of his paintings that they convey the presence of something imperturbable, or peaceful, whether it is perceived as weighty silence or mountain-like solidness. These are all qualities of daam. So, how does one account for this immanent presence in the state of daam? This question pertains to what Donald Judd found in Yun’s works that he was not able to achieve himself as a Western artist.
Something similar is said of Kim’s writings, especially those from his later life: Kim and Yun  share the qualities of daam. Yun found his source of inspiration from Kim’s writing and he started out by writing Chinese characters using ink brush on rice paper. Writing Chinese characters is different from writing any other script, whether alphabetical or ideographic. Ancient East Asian writing was done with ink and brush on rice paper and the stone-ground ink had a waterlike fluidity. Ink brushes are used to write Chinese ideograms, composed of individual 劃 (hoeks) which are not written the way one writes with a pen. A hoek is a movement not just of the hand holding the brush but of the entire body. The energy and the force of the body is channeled through the intense concentration and motion of the hand onto the brushstroke. It is exactly like a martial-art movement; each movement is a forceful vector, making impact on the qi-energy field of the surroundings.
Chinese ideograms are pictograms—symbolic but also representational—and thus to use ink brush to write ideogrammic characters is already to paint. 書 (writing) = 畵 (painting). Notice the similarity of the two characters; they are nearly identical. East Asian ink brush writing consists of constructing an invisible force field on the surface of the paper. For each hoek is not a mere scalar line but is a vector-like thrust with directionality and physical force when drawn on paper. To write is thus more than just to record a text for future reading; it is to construct an immanent, albeit latent, invisible force field for any future viewer or reader to activate and respond to in some sort of attunement. If the force and directionality of the thrust of a brush is recognized as 勢 (seh), then the force field or energy field automatically emergent when a number of hoeks have been drawn together into a configuration can be called the 筆勢 (pilseh). In writing Chinese characters, Kim was constructing his own kind of 筆勢 (pilseh). He was able to confer this daam quality only because he had gone through spiritual training as a 修行者 (suhaengja),6 involving writing as a rigorous regimen of spiritual training to arrive at the state of daam. Others have noticed this aspect of Yun’s personae beyond his being a painter. For example, Lee U-fan stated: “In the case of Yun Hyong-keun, one suspects that his kind of painting, the kind of arduous labor involved, had to be backed up by his bodily capability—that that must have been honed through rigorous bodily-spiritual exercises of suhaengja.”7
In their construction of “literal objects”—better known as Minimal Art—Judd and his contemporaries, for example, must have asked themselves: How long can one go on creating shaped canvases or geometric units? Why not then go on making just any literal objects? That is how Minimal art was born, so named by Richard Wollheim on account of the minimal contents in those literally made simple objects. Michael Fried viewed this label as a misleading concept, preferring the term ‘literal art.’ When Judd first saw Yun’s works, even though they were painted on traditional Western canvases, he detected in them a palpable presence with a unique spiritual quality which must have been astounding to him. These were minimally executed oil paintings on canvas, with very little or no compositional complexity; yet, Judd perceived presences in Yun’s works of a kind lacking in his own paintings or those of his contemporaries’. Judd fell in love with Yun’s works and wanted to show them, and even altered the architectural design of his museum being built in Texas to accommodate Yun’s paintings, to create just the right space for his art. 
Yun was able to impart the daam presence to his works by transforming the act of painting into an act of writing with ink brush in order to build up the complex configuration of brushstrokes, creating layer upon layers. He added chemical solvents to oil paint in order to find the watery viscosity of ink. He used ink brushes of different sizes to apply brushstrokes of a writer like Kim. The reiterative application of brushstrokes makes fissures, gaps and cracks hidden between layers of brushstrokes. A dim light emerges from these fissures, emitting a sense of inner light from within the paintings. These inner lights are no illusions but actually exist in their immanence, hence are sublimated into something transcendental. The result is a peculiar presence built out of real energy fields and vector forces on the physical material surface of a canvas. Weighty vectorial brushstrokes of a trained body and mind establish 筆勢 (pilseh), invisible to the eye but present. Such is the presence of energy shared in the works of Kim and Yun.

IV. Yun Hyong-keun and Western Modernist Abstractionists
It is necessary to address certain similarities between Yun and Western painters. Carol Vogel of The New York Times points out that one of Yun’s Umber Blue paintings bears remarkable resemblance to Richard Serra and Barnett Newman,8 while Joan Kee sees a certain affinity in artistic motifs to Mark Rothko.9 Yoo Uri mentions Caspar Friedrich as well as Victor Turner in addition to Newman, and Rothko as some of the great names in Western painting with whom, she finds, Yun shares an aesthetics of the sublime.10 It is important to discuss this issue of resemblances or similarities across paradigmatic incommensurability. In the case of Yun, since he shifted his artistic, philosophical, and spiritual allegiance to Kim’s “complex of Arting practices,”11 he had nothing in common in thinking or in Arting with those artists who operated outside of this ancient East Asian art world of the ink brush. 
Yun’s works differ in fundamental ways from the prominent Western painters listed above, in spite of apparent resemblances. An analogy may be drawn between Yun’s paintings and Gerhard Richter’s monochrome paintings of grey—his early grey abstractions and the famous Eight Grey paintings. The color grey is actually a non-color, hence the daam color par excellence. One overwhelming feeling that one derives from Richter’s grey paintings is that of quietude, serenity, and a certain pathos. However, these feelings are to be perceived on the part of the viewers. As a contemporary artist who has seriously contemplated the turbulent history of the Western World in the twentieth century, and having personally experienced the traumas of World War II and its aftermath in Stalinist East Germany before his eventual flight to the West, Richter seems to incorporate in his works a historical outlook that is less than optimistic. That unspoken pessimism is reflected in his monochrome works. But the overwhelming mood of pathos in the color spectrum of grey that spreads over his huge canvases has to be perceived. His grey is indeed a daam color, yet the umber blue color in Yun’s works cannot be said to be of the same daam color; it is not the color, but rather the presence, the ontological mood, that one is asked to encounter. In that sense, if Richter’s is perceptual art, then Yun’s is ontological art. This line of argument could be extended to differentiate Yun’s work from that of other Western counterparts.
Inevitably, the question must be addressed if other Korean Dansaekhwa painters have not had the same kind of painterly genealogical connection that goes back to Kim. There might be many Korean artists who also claim that they are continuing the tradition of ink brush painting or writing dating back to Kim, but such claims will have to be scrutinized. For, as Pak Hyeon argues in a critical spirit, even the widely accepted experts on Korean traditional art and culture cannot be trusted to have genuine expertise. Pak comments on the supposed authority on Kim: 
Years of exile enabled Kim to come up with his writing style built on daam. It reflected his awakening as a sudoja (修道者, the one who pursues Tao), nothing less…. Kim was a scholar before he was a calligrapher. His writing cannot be assessed without taking into consideration his unique scholarship and spiritual pursuit of daam.… Yet, supposed authorities […] talk only of what is visible with [the] eyesight only, ignoring far greater aspects of Kim’s presence in his art.12
Jullien has offered a closely related insight: in the works of Kim and Yun, and for that matter traditional East Asian artists, what is visible to the eye are only indices for something far greater, real, and palpable. Both Pak and Jullien are lamenting that even East Asians now no longer have clues to this aspect of East Asian art. Yet it is this art as practiced by Kim and Yun that is now in demand, answering the call voiced by Lacoue-Labarthe. 

V. The Art of Daam Spirit as the Answer
All right, art is dead now; but the question still remains—as a question—of the possibility of a great art (that is, an art comparable to Greek art), and it remains all the more as a question in that the beginnings of a response can only be found if—and only if—thought will be capable of speaking of art in another language than that of aesthetics which is the language of the whole of philosophy since Plato and Aristotle, i.e., precisely since the end of great art.13
—Lacoue-Labarthe
Ever since the end of art arrived with the internal exhaustion of the modernism of Western art, a state of anomie reigns and the situation of ‘anything goes’ prevails over the entire landscape of the Western Art World. Stanley Cavell seemingly mourned the situation of the “pervasive possibility of fraudulence”; there were apologist theories advocating postmodernist and later neo-avant-garde art or other theoretically sophisticated and advanced experimental art.
It is odd that many leading theorists of modern and postmodern (post-historical) art failed to see that any kind of explanatory discursive practices—whether in the name of postmodernism, neo-avant-garde, Minimalism, Arte Povera, Land art, etc.—can only be post hoc, ad hoc; contrived, patched-up theories. Arthur Danto says that any art after the end of art cannot stand by itself as an example of art. As such, indeed, post-historical artists always seem to have the need to offer some sort of justificatory impromptu theories whenever they do gallery or museum shows. Such post-historical art perfectly fits the mold that will never rise above the condition of the “pervasive possibility of fraudulence” as diagnosed by Cavell. 
In a historical condition in which there is no accepted set of criteria by which to judge if something is ‘art’ or ‘not,’ it becomes a question of who is offering a more successful market-conscious strategy in the production of art. The modernist predicament in the contemporary westernized global art world is that nothing can be discounted as art, but by the same token nothing can be legitimized as art either. Perhaps no one has the courage to call out the falsehood of the many varieties of Conceptual artists. In that netherworld of neither ‘art’ nor ‘not-art,’ there are many who self-market themselves as great artists and who are easily spotted at so many international art events. This kind of attitude has spread to the global art world and is potentially detrimental, to the point of nihilism, to the art of our age.
The situation of post-historical art is so singular in its entire stretch of Western history that any art critic or theorist of post-historical art must assume the attitude of a cultural anthropologist who has just come across a primitive tribe. Post-historical avant-garde artists are the post-historical art critics’ primitives, who have discarded the grammar and vocabulary of the language of art. Every verbal utterance from them would be completely incomprehensible. Only from what they actually do in the name of art can one forcefully derive an understanding of post-historical art and of the rules of the game of Arting they are engaged in. Notwithstanding the so-called celebration of the sheer plurality of ‘anything goes,’ the untenable situation of post-historical art is that of a nihilist endgame with no possibility of an exit. Therefore, it is not possible to perceive these post-historical artists as practitioners of the most advanced art in today’s world. (Prominent theorists often use the term ‘advanced’ art, confident that they are situated at the very hegemonic center of the world and a fortiori that any type of work done in their realm must be the most advanced.)
In such a dire situation, no new direction of art nor any new beginning can be conceivable, not to speak of finding or deriving such a new direction or beginning from within the internally exhausted intellectual, spiritual, and cultural resources of Western civilization. Lacoue-Labarthe echoes Heidegger’s anticipation of the historical destiny of Western art: “Our age demands art that is intrinsically different from what is widely accepted as art.” What can this art be? Instead of the vacuous discourses of contemporary art as post-historical or postmodern art, a new art that is foundational in an altogether different sense of the term is needed. Otherwise, Art will remain at a dead end where it is exhausted.
The art that our age demands is therefore a “Great art […] an art that is comparable to Greek art” but is capable of being thought of in “another language than that of aesthetics which is the language of the whole of philosophy since Plato and Aristotle.”14 This art cannot be what today goes under the name of “contemporary art,” which follows a Dantoesque philosophical and theoretical articulation. There actually is an art that is “intrinsically different from what is widely accepted as art” and is capable of being thought of in a language other than that of aesthetics as conceptualized in the Western tradition of philosophy: it is art as it was once practiced in ancient East Asia. Jullien has brilliantly delineated the radical difference of East Asian art (Northeast Asian art of a millennium or two ago) from Western art until its demise. In the ancient Northeast Asian world of art, disciplines based on the notion of aesthetics is not needed.15 A new “great art,” in a sense comparable to Greek art and capable of becoming foundational, is emerging, and the daam painting from South Korea is the harbinger, if not yet the full-fledged embodiment, of the next “great art” capable of reconfiguring the globally Westernized—and therefore of reconfiguring contemporary art as a global phenomenon.